+++
title = "Mortals, Fairies and Demi-Fey"
description = "On the three principal types of sentient folk in Dolmenwood."
weight = 1
[extra] 
lead_image = "images/Kindred.png"
+++

Kindreds of sentient folk are classified as one of three types: mortal, fairy,
or demi-fey. From among the myriad Kindreds of each type that inhabit
Dolmenwood, this book presents six as playable character options. This section
describes the generalities of fairies, mortals, and demi-fey. The Kindreds that
players can select are then elucidated in the following pages.

### Fairies, Cold Iron, and Silver

**Susceptibility to cold iron:** As the basest of all metals, iron is anathema
to the rarefied bodies of fairies. Fairies suffer additional damage if hit with
cold iron weapons (see p119).

**Repulsion to silver:** While not as intrinsically harmful to fairies as cold
iron, mortal silver is more vehemently scorned. The touch of the metal is
repulsive to fairies, instantly bringing on a queasiness of the stomach.

**Demi-fey:** Demi-fey retain their ancestors’ vulnerability to cold iron, but
have dwelt in the mortal world long enough to become accustomed to mortal
silver.

## Mortals

Kindreds whose origins are within the confines of the mortal world. Playable
Kindreds: Breggles, humans, and mosslings.

### Mortality

Mortals are swept along on the currents of time: ageing, deteriorating, and
dying like all things in the natural world. Their lifespans are counted in
decades, and they suffer from all manner of diseases and ailments.

### No Innate Magic

Aside from a few individuals gifted with a sensitivity to arcane energies,
mortal Kindreds have no innate magic. The majority of mortal folk are
mistrustful of magic, regarding it as perilous and unnatural.

### Religion and Worldview

Worship of deities and other powers (e.g. exalted heroes, ancestors, spirits of
the natural world) is common among mortal folk - see
[Religion in Dolmenwood](@/setting/4_religions.md). Religion and worship often
play a dominant role in their societies and daily lives. Mortals who dedicate
themselves to the service of a religion may receive blessings in the form of
holy magic.

### Mindset

Governed by the laws of time and nature, mortals tend to be social creatures,
banding together for safety and cooperation. The towns and villages of mortal
folk in Dolmenwood act as a respite from the dangers of the wild.

## Fairies

Kindreds that originate in the undying world of Fairy. Most fairies never
venture into the mortal world, but some romantic, obsessive, or adventurous
individuals gain a taste for the place and tarry for extended periods. Playable
Kindreds: Elves and grimalkins.

### Immortality

While fairies may be killed, they remain untouched by the ravages of time and do
not die naturally. Likewise, fairies are immune to diseases of non-magical
origin.

### Innate Magic

As natives of the other world, where the logic of the mortal world does not
hold, fairies possess innate magic—known as glamours—that amazes and confounds
mortals. Glamours take many forms, but powers of illusion, inveiglement,
enchantment, and vanishing are common.

### Otherworldliness

Unless disguised by magic, fairies always carry an air of unearthliness about
them in the mortal world. This may be perceived by mortals as awe-inspiring,
intoxicating, fearsome, or dreadful. Animals invariably find fairies unnerving.

### Religion and Worldview

There are no gods in Fairy, and most fairy societies lack formalised religions,
instead giving rise to myriad baroque cosmologies and philosophies of living.
One common conception is of a cosmic library wherein the deeds of all creatures
are recorded in tiny golden books (with mortal lives as mere footnotes). The
deities and powers worshipped by mortals only concern themselves with the mortal
world and its natives. They have no spiritual connection with fairies.

### Mindset

Fairies are wracked with passions that run deeper than mortals can fathom. They
can be at once wise beyond measure and petty as children, with an unwavering
devotion to their own personal whims. In Fairy, great kingdoms and hierarchies
of nobility constrain the most fiery impulses, but those fairies who come to
Dolmenwood tend to be individualists of bold and adventurous spirit.

### Fairy Adventurers in the Mortal World

Fairy PCs have chosen to come to the mortal world without a direct means of
return to Fairy. Players should consider their reason for departure when
creating fairy characters. For example, the character may be in exile, fleeing
some peril, or simply wishing for a new start.

## Demi-Fey

Kindreds of Fairy origin that have forsaken their native world and taken up
(more or less) permanent residence in the mortal world. Over many generations,
exposure to time in the mortal world has changed demi-fey Kindreds such that
they are no longer true fairies. Playable Kindreds: Woodgrues.

### Gradual Mortality

Demi-fey no longer possess the immortality of their forebears, ageing and dying
akin to mortals. Their life spans, however, are long, commonly stretching into a
fourth century. Likewise, demi-fey are susceptible to the diseases of the mortal
world.

### Remnants of Innate Magic

Most demi-fey retain some aspects of the innate magic of their fairy ancestors,
but usually diminished by long exposure to the mortal world or transformed into
semi-innate magical traditions passed down over generations.

### Religion and Worldview

Like fairies, demi-fey have no spiritual connection with the deities and powers
of mortal religions. They tend to be superstitious, rather than religious, each
folk having accumulated a body of odd beliefs and lore since their arrival in
the mortal world.

### Mindset

Similarly to mortals, demi-fey tend to be social creatures, though they rarely
gather in large settlements. Demi-fey cultures often evolve from the
idiosyncratic beliefs and habits of a handful of esteemed fairy ancestors.
