+++
title = "The Journey Begins"
description = "A wanderer’s first steps into the tricksome and beguiling Dolmenwood."
weight = 1
[extra] 
lead_image = "images/Adventurers.png"
+++

This website is a gateway to adventure in the beguiling realm of Dolmenwood - a
swathe of tangled woods, fungus-encrusted glades, and foetid marsh on the wild
borders of civilisation. Rife with intrigue, secrets, and magic, Dolmenwood
draws travellers of adventurous spirit, daring them to venture within.

**Explore the wild places** of the Wood, travelling through bramble-choked
dells, fungal forests, and accursed bogland, bedding down among root and bracken
amid the nocturnal babbling of strange beasts.

**Unearth treasure hoards** in forgotten fairy ruins, haunted manors, dripping
caverns, crystal grottoes, unhallowed barrow mounds, and abandoned delvings.

**Confront fell beasts**, roving fungal monstrosities, terrible wyrms, tricksome
fairies, and restless spirits of the long deceased.

**Recover saintly relics** and shrines lost in the befuddling tangle of the
Wood, gaining the favour of the Church by returning them to civilisation.

**Forage for weird fungi and herbs** in the untrod depths of the woods, many
with useful magical powers—and many that can be sold for profit.

**Strike against Chaos**, defending civilisation from the encroaching forces of
the wicked, half-unicorn Nag-Lord who lurks in the corrupted northern woods.

**Unravel secrets of deep magic**, charting the obelisks, dolmens, and ley lines
littered throughout Dolmenwood— but beware the sinister Drune cult that wards
them.

**Seek the counsel of witches or the sinister Hag**, wielders of magic that can
heal, hex, or divine the future.

**Meddle in the affairs of nobility**, allying with a noble house in its
intrigues and power plays in the courts of High-Hankle and Castle Brackenwold.

**Journey along fairy roads**, ancient magical paths bordering on the ageless
world of Fairy that allow travel through- out Dolmenwood - and perchance to
realms beyond.

**Return to the homely hearth** to share tales of peril with quaint locals over
a mug of ale and a well-stoked pipe.
