+++
title = "Languages"
description = "The tongues and cants of the sentient folk of Dolmenwood."
weight = 3
[extra] 
lead_image = "images/TalkingWeirdness.png"
+++

A multitude of languages, dialects, and cants are spoken within Dolmenwood, from
the common tongues of mortal folk to the otherworldly intonations of Fairy. Many
of these languages can be learned by Player Characters (see Player Character
Languages), while others are the sole province of ancient fairies and learned
sages.

## The Common Tongue

### Woldish

The language spoken by virtually all sentient creatures in Dolmenwood. Woldish
is a dialect of the common tongue that is spoken in the wider world beyond the
Wood.

### Old Woldish

The language of the folk who entered Dolmenwood and founded the Kingdom (now
Duchy) of Brackenwold.

**Learning:** Although Old Woldish is no longer spoken, its study is common
among the well-educated.

## Breggle Tongues

### Caprice

A language evolved among the breggle aristocracy of the High Wold, encompassing
greatly simplified elements of the High Elfish tongue melded with the more
eloquent components of Gaffe. A large canon of literature exists in this
language, written at times in an abridged form of the High Elfish script and at
times in the Woldish script.

**Learning:** Caprice is in common use and easily learned.

### Gaffe

The native tongue of lower ranking breggles: a melodic language of bleats and
gurgles. Gaffe includes many words derived from Woldish and, though it is of
utterly different origin, shares a small number of words with the Sylvan
language.

**Learning:** Gaffe is in common use and easily learned.

## The Scriptural Tongue

### Liturgic

The holy language of the Pluritine Church, used extensively in scripture and
sermon. The origins of Liturgic lie in a land far removed from Dolmenwood, but
its usage is now common throughout many lands due to the expansions of the
Church. It is a purely scriptural language and is seldom spoken outside of
sermons.

**Learning:** Liturgic is in common use and easily learned. Fairies and
demi-fey, as they have no spiritual connection with the deities of mortals,
cannot learn Liturgic and find its tones somewhat unpleasant.

## Fairy Tongues

### The Immortal Tongue of Fairy

The language of the most elevated denizens of the Fairy world—those ancient
beings said to be older than the mortal world itself. The immortal tongue is of
such primal potency that all sentient beings understand its honeyed tones.
However, only under the most incredibly portentous circumstances may a mortal
expect to hear this speech. The most ancient of fairy folk are little more than
legend, and their language is practically mythical.

**Learning:** No mortal or lesser fairy may speak the undying tongue, and those
who attempt to study its treasury of words are beset by hex and misfortune.

### High Elfish

The language of the fairy nobility (for example, the Cold Prince and his
retinue) is a derivative of the Immortal Tongue of Fairy. The predilection of
fairy nobles for the outlandishly baroque is reflected in the convoluted gram-
mar and voluminous lexicon.

**Learning:** Mortal scholars view High Elfish as the most fiendishly complex
language ever devised. Due to its intricacy, this tongue is virtually impossible
for non-fairies to learn. Even fairies of the lower castes find it impenetrable.

### Mewl

The secret language of the grimalkins and other cat-like fairies. Mundane cats
can also converse in this tongue (often to their surprise!), if addressed, and
prove eloquent conversationalists.

**Learning:** Cat fairies take grave offence at others (especially mortals!)
studying their language and go to great lengths to prevent knowledge of its
sprawling vocabulary and subtle variations of yowl from propagating.

### Sylvan

The common speech of the fairies and demi-fey of Dolmenwood, believed to be
distantly derived from the Immortal Tongue of Fairy.

**Learning:** Sylvan is in common use and easily learned.

### Dwelve

The common speech of fairies and demi-fey that dwell in the underworld beneath
Dolmenwood, as well as those with whom they trade. Distantly related to High
Elfish.

**Learning:** Dwelve is not commonly spoken by surface dwellers, but is easily
learned by those with the desire.

## The Mossling Tongue

### Mulch

An obscure tongue spoken by mosslings and some sentient species of plants and
fungi.

**Learning:** The squelching, grinding sounds of which Mulch consists are
notoriously difficult for other Kindreds to reproduce, though a handful of sages
have made rudimentary studies of the language.

## Drunic Tongues

### Drunic

The language used for everyday communication among the Drune, as well as in
ritual, scripture, and historical records. Numerous are the standing stones in
Dolmenwood which are inscribed with runes of the Drunic tongue.

**Learning**: Drunic and its intricate script are a closely guarded secret of
the Drune.

### Old Drunic

The sacred tongue of the ancestors of the Drune—an esoteric language of great
antiquity, only found in the most ancient records in the hidden vaults of the
Drune.

**Learning:** Old Drunic is virtually lost. Only the most erudite Drune sages
have any knowledge of it.
