+++
title = "Religions"
description = "The faiths and spiritual practices of the mortal folk of Dolmenwood."
weight = 4
+++

Religious practices play a daily role in the lives of many among the mortal
Kindreds of Dolmenwood. An overview of the religious beliefs of humans,
breggles, and mosslings is presented here.


## Pluritine Church

{{ portrait(path="images/PluritineSymbol.png", caption="Pluritine Holy Symbol") }}

The dominant religion in Dolmenwood, sanctioned as the official religion of the
Duchy of Brackenwold. Most humans in Dolmenwood are adherents of the Church, to
one degree or another.

**Deities:** A nameless, male god, only referred to by the epithet “the One True
God.” God’s true name is regarded as ineffable. Daily practice focuses on
venerating the host of saints—exalted people who performed mighty and miraculous
deeds in the service of the Church, now said to act as intermediaries between
mortals and God.

**Origin:** The Pluritine Church originated 1,600 years ago, in a land far from
Dolmenwood, when the five prophets (Ogrimund, Hogrish, Elidine, Lacrimyde, and
These) received a vision of the cosmos and the struggle of all living beings.
The prophets travelled the world to spread word of their vision - that the gods
of all religions are falsely named aspects of One True God, who should not be
named or depicted. After 17 years of proselytising, the prophets ascended to
heaven without knowing mortal death.

**Cosmology:** The Church teaches that God created the mortal world, the
paradisical realm of heaven, and the accursed realm of hell. He populated the
mortal world with humans, other mortal Kindreds, and animals. He created angels
to serve Him in heaven and devils to torment the damned in hell. Lastly, God
created the world of Fairy to demonstrate the folly of life without faith and
salvation.

**Tenets:** Depiction or naming of God is heresy. Sentient life is sacred and
must be protected and nurtured. Evil deeds are to be punished, but free will is
fundamental. Each individual must be free to choose a life of evil (and eternal
damnation in hell) or good (and eternal reward in heaven).

**Practices:** Daily prayer to a patron saint. Weekly visits to church for
communal prayer (traditionally on Sunning). Pilgrimage to cathedrals or holy
sites.

**Holy symbols:** A circle with five rays descending from it, representing God
and the five prophets. This symbol is known as the Chapes. Symbols of the three
clerical orders (p61) and effigies of individual saints are also common.

**Holy texts:** The most holy text - known as the Pragmaphon - recounts the
visions, lives, and apocalyptic prophecies of the five prophets. Lesser bodies
of text also exist around most of the saints, recounting their deeds and
teachings.

**Membership:** The Church has a strict hierarchy of priesthood - see
[Pluritine Church Hierarchy](@/setting/4_religions.md#pluritine-church-hierarchy). Clerics and friars
serve the Church in wild and dangerous lands.

**Relationships:** While all Kindreds are welcomed into the faith, most
adherents and officials are humans. The Pluritine Church, prevalent in many
human domains beyond Dolmenwood, is a monotheistic, evangelistic religion that
seeks to convert all to its faith. While usually undertaken with compassion,
this urge to convert others has historically led to conflict (sometimes bloody)
with other religions and nations. This, in turn, has led to the persecution of
adherents of the Pluritine Church in certain lands.

### Pluritine Church Hierarchy

The major hierarchical ranks within the Church are as follows, along with the
Levels of PC clerics/friars regarded as being of roughly equivalent rank.

**Archbishop:** Per land.

**Bishop:** Per major region of each land.

**Commander:** Three (one per Holy Order) under each bishop. Level 10+ PCs.

**Abbot / Archdeacon:** Per abbey or city. Level 6+ PCs.

**Vicar:** Per settlement. Level 3+ PCs.

**Curate:** Several serve each vicar. Level 1+ PCs.

## Gwyrae

{{ portrait(path="images/GwyraeSymbol.png", caption="Gwyrae Holy Symbol") }}

The old religion of the human folk of Dolmenwood, before the arrival of the
Pluritine Church (around 1,200 years ago) largely swept it away. Gwyrae is an
Old Woldish word meaning “sacred glade.”

**Deities:** A pantheon consisting of dozens of deities—called Wood Gods—of
greater or lesser importance. They are regarded as manifestations of the spirit
of Dolmenwood. In modern times, the Green Man—god of feast, ale, revelry, and
hunting—is the only Wood God that remains prominent in folkloric memory.

**Origin:** Lost to time.

**Cosmology:** Remnants of Gwyrae mythology can be found in local folk belief in
Dolmenwood. For example, locals still speak of a “world tree” on which all known
realms of existence are placed, with Fairy as the tree’s root. Belief in rein-
carnation into plants or animals also lingers in folklore.

**Tenets:** Lost to time.

**Practices:** A number of folk practices in Dolmenwood can

**perhaps be traced back to Gwyrae:** for example, the belief in a state of
merry inebriation as a means of communion with greater powers.

**Holy symbols:** The symbol of the Green Man—a cruciform oak—can still be spied
carved on old buildings or in graveyards that were appropriated by the Pluritine
Church. In ancient times, adherents would wear cruciform or Y-shaped pendants of
oak wood or root, but such symbols are seldom seen in the present day.

**Holy texts:** None known.

**Membership:** It is said that the witches of Dolmenwood still worship the old
gods in secret.

**Relationships:** The Pluritine Church suppresses any remnants of Gwyrae.
Otherwise, as a virtually dead religion, it has little contact with other faiths
or folk.

## Aud Frengd Hlerr

{{ portrait(path="images/AudFrengdHlerrSymbol.png", caption="Aud Frengd Hlerr Holy Symbol") }}

The system of ancestor worship practiced among breggles. The name roughly
translates as “praising the ancestors.”

**Deities:** None. A multitude of ancestors are venerated, ranging from personal
family members to great heroes of myth. The semi-mythical ancestor Hraigl is
commonly revered, as mother of the longhorn noble houses.

**Origin:** The practice of revering ancestors originates in the Passions of
Ghrygaile—the tale of an ancient breggle warrior-chieftain who attributed his
glory in battle to the aid of his ancestors, who fought by his side.

**Cosmology:** Aud frengd Hlerr teaches that the world (this includes Fairy) is
a testing ground. Individuals who prosper and honour their families gather in an
afterlife of eternal feasting, along with their ancestors. Those who lead craven
or spiritless lives enter a dismal realm of torment where their souls are
annihilated by gnawing worms.

**Tenets:** Honouring and furthering the position of ones family is utmost.
Personal misdeeds can be redeemed by sufficient propitiation of the ancestors.

**Practices:** Daily prayer to ancestors. Occasional sacrifices of valuables to
ancestors. Pilgrimages to the graves of venerated ancestors.

**Holy symbols:** A ring of horns, often those of honoured ancestors.

**Holy texts:** The Hlerrllaindr—a set of books recounting the deeds of the most
esteemed breggles.

**Membership:** Most breggles practice Aud frengd Hlerr. There is no formal
priesthood.

**Relationships:** Breggles regard Aud frengd Hlerr as a philosophy of living,
rather than a religion per se. It is not contradictory to also follow another
religion, for example the Pluritine Church. The cosmology of Aud frengd Hlerr is
broadly compatible with that of the Church.

## Mogba

{{ portrait(path="images/MogbaSymbol.png", caption="Mogba Holy Symbol") }}

The traditional religious practices of the mosslings of Dolmenwood, called Mogba
in their own language (meaning something like “holy decay”).

**Deities:** A multitude of deities of the deep forest and fecund underworld,
too numerous to list in full. Each settlement has its own local deity, and many
homes have their own god of the cauldron, trough, or compost heap. All are
regarded as inhabiting the mortal world as divine siblings, part of a pantheon.
Some of the most widely known deities are Mbombre (the clay god), Blosquom
(fungal god of the village of Orbswallow), and Splobgra (the worm god).

**Origin:** Mogba goes back to the unrecorded mists of time in Dolmenwood.
Mossling mythology does not speak of a founder of the religion.

**Cosmology:** Visions sent by the Mogba deities reveal that the world sits atop
a cosmic puffball on the back of a toad named Hwogra. At the end of time, the
puffball will explode, releasing the spores of the next cosmic cycle.

**Tenets:** The cycles of nature are sacrosanct, especially those around ageing,
death, and decay into the soil. Individuals are but temporary manifestations of
the whims of the soil. The unfathomable mystery of life is to be savoured.

**Practices:** Psychedelic communion with the Mogba deities. Questing to consult
with mould oracles. Fertilising sacred plants with the compost of beloved
ancestors.

**Holy symbols:** A toadstool with one or more eyes.

**Holy texts:** The evolving body of myths and legends known as Hwogm is
primarily passed down orally, but the mould oracles do maintain written copies
of various vintages.

**Membership:** Mould oracles act as hermit-priests and spiritual guides.
Otherwise, there is no formal religious structure.

**Relationships:** Mogba is virtually unknown to other Kindreds and the religion
has nothing to say on the subject of the religions of other folk.

## Cults of the Nag-Lord

According to rumour, cults venerating the wicked Nag-Lord have begun to spring
up in the wild places of Dolmenwood. It is said that crookhorns, monsters, and
even corrupted humans gather to worship the twisted King of the Wood and further
his evil plans.
